docs/components/query-engine.md, before:

# Query Engine

LDkit ships with a simple SPARQL query engine that lets you execute queries over
a SPARQL endpoint. This engine is used by default, unless you specify a custom
one.

If you want to query other RDF data sources like files or in-memory quad stores,
you need to use a custom query engine like [Comunica](https://comunica.dev), or
implement your own.

## Default query engine

```ts
import { QueryEngine } from "ldkit";

const engine = new QueryEngine();
```

The `QueryEngine` follows
[RDF/JS Query specification](https://rdf.js.org/query-spec/) and implements the
`StringSparqlQueryable` interface.

The `QueryEngine` is configurable through Context.

```ts
import { type Context, QueryEngine } from "ldkit";

const context: Context = {
  sources: ["https://example.com/sparql"], // required, must include one SPARQL endpoint
  fetch: customFetchFunction, // optional, must follow standard fetch interface
};
const engine = new QueryEngine();

const response = await engine.queryBoolean("ASK { ?s ?p ?o }", context);
```

## Custom query engine

You can use a custom query engine with LDkit - same as the included query
engine, it needs to implement `StringSparqlQueryable` interface from the
[RDF/JS Query specification](https://rdf.js.org/query-spec/).

For advanced federated querying over multiple datasources you can also use
Comunica, or a custom engine derived from that - see
[Query with Comunica](../advanced/query-with-comunica).

Commit message:

Documented setting default query engine

docs/components/query-engine.md, after:

# Query Engine

LDkit ships with a simple SPARQL query engine that lets you execute queries over
a SPARQL endpoint. This engine is used by default, unless you specify a custom
one.

If you want to query other RDF data sources like files or in-memory quad stores,
you need to use a custom query engine like [Comunica](https://comunica.dev), or
implement your own.

## Default query engine

```ts
import { QueryEngine } from "ldkit";

const engine = new QueryEngine();
```

The `QueryEngine` follows
[RDF/JS Query specification](https://rdf.js.org/query-spec/) and implements the
`StringSparqlQueryable` interface.

The `QueryEngine` is configurable through [context](./context).

```ts
import { type Context, QueryEngine } from "ldkit";

const context: Context = {
  sources: ["https://example.com/sparql"], // required, must include one SPARQL endpoint
  fetch: customFetchFunction, // optional, must follow standard fetch interface
};
const engine = new QueryEngine();

const response = await engine.queryBoolean("ASK { ?s ?p ?o }", context);
```

> Note: The default query engine supports all SPARQL endpoints that conform to
> the SPARQL 1.1 specification and can return data of MIME
> `application/sparql-results+json` for `SELECT` and `ASK` queries, and
> `application/rdf+json` for `CONSTRUCT` queries.

## Custom query engine

You can use a custom query engine with LDkit - same as the included query
engine, it needs to implement `StringSparqlQueryable` interface from the
[RDF/JS Query specification](https://rdf.js.org/query-spec/).

For advanced federated querying over multiple datasources you can also use
Comunica, or a custom engine derived from that - see
[Query with Comunica](../advanced/query-with-comunica).

## Setting default query engine

A query engine instance needs to be passed to a [resource](./resource) as a
parameter in order to query data, and there are two ways how to handle that.
Either you can pass the engine directly as an argument when creating the
resource, or you can set an engine instance as a default one. If there is a
default engine instance, then the resource will use that engine, if you do not
provide one directly.

```ts
import { createResource, setDefaultEngine } from "ldkit";

const engine = new MyCustomQueryEngine();
setDefaultEngine(engine);

const resource = createResource(MySchema); // will use the custom engine, which is now default
```
